---
Created On: 2021-12-23 12:55
Creator: Nitin Pai
publish: true
---

Status: [[Brewed]]


To round off the year 2021, I asked several of my learned and thoughtful friends to recommend one book they read this year. I go through the very interesting list of recommendations in two Takshashila [All Things Policy podcasts](https://takshashila.org.in/all-things-policy-our-2021-reading-list-part-1/). You can quickly go through the list in the show notes. 

David Malone, currently rector of the United Nations University, and a veteran Canadian diplomat is among those I asked. I'm reproducing his response in full to do full justice to his reply. 

David writes:
>I always allow books to mature a bit before I read them, generally for several years at least.  And sometimes, I loop back to a book that either defeated me or of which I retain fond memories. 
>
>This year’s reading featured one of each.
>
>[The Alexandria Quartet](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13033.The_Alexandria_Quartet), by Lawrence Durrell, the greatest achievement of a significant 20th century author whose output ranged from comic send-ups of diplomatic life in Belgrade between the two world wars to a sad falling off in the impenetrable tomes with gnomic titles that marked his decline.  Of the four volumes constituting the Quartet, the most popular is the first, Justine, of which the aging Hollywood director George Cukor made a catastrophic but unintentionally comical film in 1969.  The subsequent two volumes, Balthazar (rather daringly set around one of the few gay men anchoring a literary venture in the 1950s) and Mountolive (named for the a fictional British Ambassador in Egypt, who curiously resembled a living British foreign service figure) were chock-a-block with intrigues, hopeless love connections, and a growing sense or overall regret and sadness.  Rounding out the quartet, Clea (centered on a restless Alexandrian female artist), charts the world created in the previous volumes falling apart in a variety of ways.  Thus one bids farewell to the quartet’s nearly one thousand pages overwhelmed, above all, by a sense of loss. 
>
>Two random contextual comments.  My mother had brought me up with her love of these books In my long-gone twenties, while living in Egypt for four years,  I picked up Justine, and hated it – too slow moving: boring!  But when I returned to the Quartet this year more attuned to an author requiring time to appreciate his fictional universe linked to the real one of the ancient city of Alexandria on Egypt’s Mediterranean shore, I was instantly engrossed. 
>
>A sad coda, however: while living in Cairo for four years in the late 1970s, Durrell turned up with a BBC TV crew filming the return of the great man to Egypt.  I met him, and was shocked to find him shriveled as both  person and an artist, all pride with little good to say about any6body who had entered his life.  By then, after several unsuccessful marriages, his personality had curdled and he was financially mean.  And not just that: he felt everyone (including President Sadat of Egypt – who had no clue about him – owed him a living, or at least an audience.  I never saw the TV program that resulted & never looked for it either.   A sad twilight for so hugely talented an author when at his best.   
>
>My love of history has been with me from a very young age (8 or so), and thus, my reading often defaults to history.  And we are currently living in a golden age of the genre, due to a number of authors of highly scholarly bent and method, who nevertheless write beautifully.  This past year, I also particularly enjoyed:
>
>William Dalrymple’s most recent epic [The Anarchy](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/42972023-the-anarchy) chronicling the dramatic ups and downs of this hugely powerful entity over a period of roughly 250 years, until, after the events of 1857, the British government felt compelled to take over from it.   Full of colourful British and Indian characters dealt with unsentimentally, and vivid descriptions of the country against which their adventures unfolded, Dalrymple delivers magnificently yet again.  His narrative drive is exceptional in a book that is also so thoroughly scholarly.  Bravo!
>
>[The Fall of the Ottomans](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/21535310-the-fall-of-the-ottomans), first published in 2015 by academic historian Eugene Rogan, highlights the importance of the last of several dynasties ruling  Turkey and often neighbouring lands.  Its rivalry with imperial and then revolutionary Russia was the nail that sealed its coffin, having first become excessively embroiled in expansion into broad swather of Eastern Europe.  The Sultan’s government chose the wrong side in the great war of 1914-18, which sealed the dynasty’s fate.  In truth though, it had been fading for several generations.  Many pages are devoted to how the Great War and the designs of the imperial powers of France and, above all, Great Britain during war the great war and its immediately following years, lastingly and catastrophically shaped the Arab Middle East since then.  Truly, European Imperialism proved a disaster everywhere, occasionally producing a positive by-product but none of these beginning to justify the overall outcome.  (A new book [The Ottomans: Khans, Caesars, and Caliphs](https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/56269593-the-ottomans), also by an academic historian, Marc David Baer, promises to take us a number of centuries back in history overlapping  with Rogan’s material.  I look forward to reading it in a year or two.)
>
>[The Silk Roads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/25812847-the-silk-roads) by Peter Frankopan, an Oxford academic but also, intriguingly, a successful hotelier, published this far ranging (in both history and geography), volume in 2015.  It is bracingly illuminating, covering so much ground over several millennia, that much gets left out too, which the reader regrets.  For this reason, it may best be read in conjunction with several of the histories flagged above, and several more focusing on Asia as much as the Middle East.   I enjoyed its galloping pace, even though I kept asking “what about?” questions, relating to gaps in the book.  I hope Frankopan does not let the hotel biz take over his professional life, as he is such an accomplished tale-spinner.
>
>Finally, the most recent book I tackled, published in 2020,  a serious door-stopper by Peter Baker and Susan Glasser, journalists both, [The Man who Ran Washington: The Life and Times of James A Baker III](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/52230676-the-man-who-ran-washington), documents and assesses the all-powerful figure of Ronald Reagan’s presidency, who served as the President Reagan’s Chief of Staff and then Treasury Secretary.  After running both Reagan’s initial and subsequent presidential campaigns, he wound up being instrumental also to the election of George H. W. Bush in 1988, a friend, who he subsequently served as a world-striding Secretary of State.  The book’s well-deserved success owes a great deal to the authors revealing flaws in the man as well as the qualities that allowed him so consistently shape American policy for a dozen years, and this in spite of his own undistinguished political track-record earlier in life.
>
>I spotted Baker due to his commanding gait in New York’s Laguardia airport three or four years ago, as brisk, commanding and elegantly turned out as decades ago, and greeted him (having worked with several of his associates during his years in government).  He was courtly and engaging but brief, striding on to the great matters of state that doubtless still preoccupy him, or the management of his considerable wealth, some of it inherited, quite a lot of it made on his own, later in life.  What a man, what a life, and what a book!

#books 

See [[Sudarshan Shrikhande's Book Recommendations 2021]] and [[My Books of 2020]]